---
course_id: 18-217-graph-theory-and-additive-combinatorics-fall-2019
is_media_gallery: true
layout: course_section
menu:
  leftnav:
    identifier: fa9006ef3a16a8b931aa8d93a378115e
    name: Video Lectures
    weight: 50
title: Video Lectures
type: course
uid: fa9006ef3a16a8b931aa8d93a378115e

---
{{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-1-introduction-to-graph-theory-and-additive-combinatorics" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 1: A bridge between graph theory and additive combinatorics" description="Description: In an unsuccessful attempt to prove Fermat’s last theorem, Schur showed that every finite coloring of the integers contains a monochromatic solution to x + y = z, an early result in Ramsey theory. Professor Zhao begins the course with a proof of Schur’s theorem via graph theory and how it led to the modern development of additive combinatorics. He then takes the class on a tour of modern highlights of the field: Roth’s theorem, Szemerédi’s theorem, and the Green–Tao theorem. Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/RDO6Py97IDg/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-2-forbidding-a-subgraph-i-mantel2019s-theorem-and-turan2019s-theorem" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 2: Forbidding a Subgraph I: Mantel’s Theorem and Turán’s Theorem" description="Description: Which triangle-free graph has the maximum number of edges given the number of vertices? Professor Zhao shows the class Mantel’s theorem, which says that the answer is a complete bipartite graph. He also discusses generalizations: Turán’s theorem (for cliques) and the Erdős–Stone–Simonovits theorem (for general subgraphs). Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/YAo1sd4kuOQ/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-3-forbidding-a-subgraph-ii-complete-bipartite-subgraph" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 3: Forbidding a Subgraph II: Complete Bipartite Subgraph" description="Description: What is the maximum number of edges in a graph forbidding a cycle of length four? What about forbidding a complete bipartite graph of a fixed size? Professor Zhao discusses the Kővári–Sós–Turán theorem, which gives an upper bound. In the case of 4-cycles, a matching algebraic construction of a C4-free graph is also demonstrated. Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/hDwkKrWqdZE/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-4-forbidding-a-subgraph-iii-algebraic-constructions" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 4: Forbidding a Subgraph III: Algebraic Constructions" description="Description: How does one construct graphs that do not contain complete bipartite subgraphs of a given size? Professor Zhao explains algebraic constructions known as norm graphs and more recent constructions based on the use of random polynomials. Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/4LYom0ekars/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-5-forbidding-a-subgraph-iv-dependent-random-choice" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 5: Forbidding a Subgraph IV: Dependent Random Choice" description="Description: Professor Zhao discusses in this lecture the dependent random choice method in probabilistic combinatorics and its application to upper bounding the number of edges in an H-free graph, where H is a sparse bipartite graph. Also discussed in this lecture are the problems of forbidding an even cycle, and forbidding a clique 1-subdivision. (The video is unfortunately cut off near the end due to technical issues with the recording. Students can refer to the notes for details.) Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/NpMv0Nqmy3c/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-6-szemeredi2019s-graph-regularity-lemma-i-statement-and-proof" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 6: Szemerédi’s Graph Regularity Lemma I: Statement and Proof" description="Description: Szemerédi’s graph regularity lemma is a powerful tool in graph theory that gives a rough structural characterization of all large dense graphs. In this lecture, Professor Zhao explains the statement and proof of the regularity lemma. Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/vcsxCFSLyP8/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-7-szemeredi2019s-graph-regularity-lemma-ii-triangle-removal-lemma" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 7: Szemerédi’s Graph Regularity Lemma II: Triangle Removal Lemma" description="Description: Continuing the discussion of Szemerédi’s graph regularity lemma, Professor Zhao explains the triangle counting lemma, as well as the 3-step recipe (partition, clean, count) for applying the regularity method. Two applications are shown: the triangle removal lemma, and the graph theoretic proof of Roth’s theorem concerning sets without 3-term arithmetic progressions. Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/RD9AWDdj-Yk/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-8-szemeredi2019s-graph-regularity-lemma-iii-further-applications" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 8: Szemerédi’s Graph Regularity Lemma III: Further Applications" description="Description: After proving Roth’s theorem last lecture, Professor Zhao explains Behrend’s construction of large sets of integers without 3-term arithmetic progressions, as well as another application of the triangle removal lemma to subsets of a 2-dimensional lattice without corners. The second half of the lecture discusses further applications of the regularity method within graph theory: graph embedding, counting, and removal lemmas, as well as a proof of the Erdős–Stone–Simonovits theorem on H-free graphs. Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/oiKLWa_0dhs/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-9-szemeredi2019s-graph-regularity-lemma-iv-induced-removal-lemma" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 9: Szemerédi’s Graph Regularity Lemma IV: Induced Removal Lemma" description="Description: Professor Zhao explains a strengthening of the graph regularity method that is then used to prove the induced graph removal lemma. He also discusses applications of the regularity method in computer science to graph property testing.  Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/3IxWLibV_tU/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-10-szemeredi2019s-graph-regularity-lemma-v-hypergraph-removal-and-spectral-proof" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 10: Szemerédi’s Graph Regularity Lemma V: Hypergraph Removal and Spectral Proof" description="Description: In this first half of this lecture, Professor Zhao shows how to prove Szemerédi’s theorem using the hypergraph removal lemma, as well as a discussion of the hypergraph regularity method. In the second half, he discusses a spectral graph theoretic proof of Szemerédi’s regularity lemma. Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/rBUFitIoE14/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-11-pseudorandom-graphs-i-quasirandomness" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 11: Pseudorandom Graphs I: Quasirandomness" description="Description: Pseudorandom graphs are graphs that behave like random graphs in certain prescribed ways. In this lecture, Professor Zhao discusses a classic result of Chung, Graham, and Wilson, which shows that many definitions of quasirandom graphs are surprisingly equivalent. This result highlights the role of 4-cycles in pseudorandomness. The expander mixing lemma is also discussed near the end of the lecture.  Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/TgPcNnUrE24/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-12-pseudorandom-graphs-ii-second-eigenvalue" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 12: Pseudorandom Graphs II: Second Eigenvalue" description="Description: What can be inferred about a graph from its second eigenvalue? Professor Zhao explores the role of spectra in pseudorandom graphs. Some topics discussed are Payley graphs and Gauss sums, quasirandom Cayley graphs, and the Alon–Boppana bound.  Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/Rlvwagd2BmY/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-13-sparse-regularity-and-the-green-tao-theorem" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 13: Sparse Regularity and the Green-Tao Theorem" description="Description: After a brief discussion of Ramanujan graphs, Professor Zhao discusses one of his favorite topics (also the subject of his own PhD dissertation): the regularity method for sparse graphs and its application to the celebrated Green–Tao theorem that the primes contain arbitrarily long arithmetic progressions.  Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/EnPjyNsEHQM/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-14-graph-limits-i-introduction" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 14: Graph Limits I: Introduction" description="Description: Graph limits provide a beautiful analytic framework for studying very large graphs. Professor Zhao explains what graph limits are, and their key definitions and theorems (equivalence, limit, compactness).  Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/P3tGiT72APw/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-15-graph-limits-ii-regularity-and-counting" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 15: Graph Limits II: Regularity and Counting" description="Description: Continuing the discussion of graph limits, Professor Zhao explains how graph limits can be used to generate random graphs, and also some key tools in the theory of graph limits, including the counting lemma, weak regularity lemma, and the martingale convergence theorem.  Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/9gy-CAwx0Ls/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-16-graph-limits-iii-compactness-and-applications" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 16: Graph Limits III: Compactness and Applications" description="Description: Continuing the discussion of graph limits, Professor Zhao proves the compactness of the space of graphons and discusses its consequences, such as the equivalence of convergence notions for graph sequences. Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/nCWwhF0TkVI/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-17-graph-limits-iv-inequalities-between-subgraph-densities" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 17: Graph Limits IV: Inequalities between Subgraph Densities" description="Description: Among all graphs with a given edge density, which graph has the maximum/minimum triangle density? Professor Zhao explains extremal problems on subgraph densities using the framework of graph limits.  Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/mJziV7sAZm4/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-18-roth2019s-theorem-i-fourier-analytic-proof-over-finite-field" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 18: Roth’s Theorem I: Fourier Analytic Proof over Finite Field" description="Description: The finite field model is a nice sandbox for methods and tools in additive combinatorics. Professor Zhao explains how to use Fourier analysis to prove the analog of Roth’s theorem in the finite field setting.  Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/buEtwpGvQpI/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-19-roth2019s-theorem-ii-fourier-analytic-proof-in-the-integers" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 19: Roth’s Theorem II: Fourier Analytic Proof in the Integers" description="Description: This lecture covers Roth’s original proof of Roth’s theorem in the integers, via a Fourier analytic density increment argument. It is recommended to first view the previous lecture where the method is first explained in the easier finite field setting.  Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/50oEJs-HZHQ/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-20-roth2019s-theorem-iii-polynomial-method-and-arithmetic-regularity" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 20: Roth’s Theorem III: Polynomial Method and Arithmetic Regularity" description="Description: The first half of the lecture covers a surprising recent breakthrough that gave a short polynomial method proof of Roth’s theorem in the finite field setting, substantially improving previously known bounds on the problem. The second half explains another proof of Roth’s theorem via the arithmetic regularity method, with consequences for popular differences. Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/DUA6lk7X2VY/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-21-structure-of-set-addition-i-introduction-to-freiman2019s-theorem" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 21: Structure of Set Addition I: Introduction to Freiman’s Theorem" description="Description: What can we say about sets A of integers whose sumset A + A is small? Over the next several lectures, Professor Zhao discusses Freiman’s theorem, a foundational theorem in additive combinatorics, that characterizes sets with small doubling. This lecture begins with a discussion and statement of Freiman’s theorem, and then basic tools including Ruzsa triangle inequality and Plünnecke–Ruzsa inequality. Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/oLwZFBZylUw/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-22-structure-of-set-addition-ii-groups-of-bounded-exponent-and-modeling-lemma" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 22: Structure of Set Addition II: Groups of Bounded Exponent and Modeling Lemma" description="Description: Continuing the discussion of Freiman’s theorem, Professor Zhao explains the Ruzsa covering lemma and uses it to prove Freiman’s theorem in groups of bounded exponent. He then explains Freiman homomorphisms, which are maps that partially preserve additive structure, as well as the modeling lemma.  Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/RwikpgvkN_o/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-23-structure-of-set-addition-iii-bogolyubov2019s-lemma-and-the-geometry-of-numbers" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 23: Structure of Set Addition III: Bogolyubov’s Lemma and the Geometry of Numbers" description="Description: Professor Zhao discusses additional tools for proving Freiman’s theorem: (1) Bogolyubov’s lemma for finding a large Bohr set in 2A−2A, whose proof uses Fourier analysis, and (2) the geometry of numbers, with an application of Minkowski’s second theorem on lattices.  Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/BatYGepHsnc/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-24-structure-of-set-addition-iv-proof-of-freiman2019s-theorem" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 24: Structure of Set Addition IV: Proof of Freiman’s Theorem" description="Description: This lecture concludes the proof of Freiman’s theorem on sets of small doubling. Professor Zhao also discusses additional topics related to Freiman’s theorem, including extensions to groups (abelian and nonabelian), and the polynomial Freiman–Ruzsa conjecture, which is a central open problem in additive combinatorics.  Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/IfwfCe-JZaI/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-25-structure-of-set-addition-v-additive-energy-and-balog-szemeredi-gowers-theorem" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 25: Structure of Set Addition V: Additive Energy and Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers Theorem" description="Description: Additive energy is a measure of additive structure. Professor Zhao explains why a set with large additive energy must have a large subset of small doubling. The proof is graph theoretic and uses the dependent random choice method.  Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/MlYhHsq_tOU/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/video-lectures/lecture-26-sum-product-problem-and-incidence-geometry" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 26: Sum-Product Problem and Incidence Geometry" description="Description: A famous open problem says that no set of integers can simultaneously have a small sum set A+A and a small product set AA. In the final lecture of this course, Professor Zhao explains two bounds, with the first using tools from graph theory and incidence geometry, and the second using multiplicative energy.  Instructor: Yufei Zhao" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/ydyiq1Z22gc/default.jpg" >}}